Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
going to introduce a fascinating structure in
mathematics which I'd like to call the successor
limit hierarchy and we're introducing this in
the context of these operations that we've been
talking about in order to get bigger and bigger
numbers but in fact the sort of structure of
this successor limit hierarchy transcends this
particular application and has connections with
other branches of mathematics in particular it's
intimately connected with a branch of modern set
theory having to do with ordinals now I don't
believe in modern set theory and I don't believe
in the usual theory of ordinals but nevertheless
there is still some connection between what
we're doing here which is reasonably solid
and that may be more dubious theory of ordinals
we'll talk about that later we'll also see that
this successor limit hierarchy has a very very
profound application to our understanding of
numbers and infinities and also it turns out
too infinitesimal that's going to be it down
the road a little bit but this is sort of laying
some groundwork for that so one starting point
is this idea of a successor of an operation so if
we have an arithmetic operation say circle cross
this could be an addition or multiplication
or exponentiation or perhaps something quite
different it's an operation on natural numbers
we're going to define its successor circle cross
Prime in this fashion which is now familiar
to your help so M circle across prime one is
by definition M and then there's an inductive or
recursive definition defining M circle cross prime
n plus 1 in terms of M circle cross prime of n
as well as the previous operation circle cross
ok so starting with addition we've seen that
this way we can first multiplication and then
exponentiation and then this triangle operator
the square operator and then higher operators by
just taking the successor of the previous one
so then we have something that's a little bit
outside of the successor operation another way of
getting a new operation and this involves what we
might call a limit but it's quite a different
kind of limit from the usual one studied in
analysis so we're using the same term but maybe
it would be better if we had some different term
but we'll use the same term limit and so we
have this particular sequence of operations
starting with star one or multiplication and
then start 2 which is exponentiation star 3
which is the triangle operator and so on and from
this sequence of operations we conjure up a new
operation called star infinity and an alternate
name for star affinity one that we're going to
use is star n where this end now is just a little
letter and in the alphabet and we're just going
to employ it this way you'll see the reason
for that shortly ok what is the definition of
this thing here's the definition that if m and K
are natural numbers then M star n K is M star K
K in other words we use this second number the
exponent to determine the index of the star so
we're choosing the operation in this list which
is determined by this second number there's a
star K and then we're just taking M star K k the
product of these two numbers with respect to this
particular operation so the K is somehow being
used in two different places or it's the kind of
a diagonal limit operation as we see okay so these
are the two main ingredients and now we are going
to build up a hierarchy operations and this is a
very interesting powerful and somewhat mysterious
way of getting enormous Liebig structures enormous
ly big numbers enormous ly big operations okay so
the idea is that we have these two different ways
of building new operations successors and limits
and using those we're going to build a successor
limit hierarchy of arithmetic operations so if
circle cross a is pretty much any operation we can
always take its successor now limits is a little
bit more subtle if we have a particular sequence
of operations that we've defined and put our
finger on then we can form this sort of infinite
kind of limit of these sequences in exactly the
same way as we've just done for the the case of
star 1 star 2 star 3 and of course we'd like to
be able to do this in a way that doesn't involve
us having to get into this knotty realm of what we
mean by infinite sequences so what we're saying
here is a kind of informal description of this
process and we are gonna hope that down the road
we can formalize it and make it very clear what's
going on so step by step without actually invoking
anything that's infinite now before we get into
that I'd like to take a little bit of time just to
explain a particular very special case and that is
the situation when we're looking at multiples or
powers of one when we're multiplying two of our
objects with one of our operations and the first
one happens to be one so let's have a look at the
first star operator star 1 which is multiplication
1 star 1 K which is 1 times K is actually K that's
actually rather special because all of the other
ones we get something different so 1 star 2 K is
1 to the K that's 1 one star 3 K is 1 triangle K
that's 1 to the 1 to the 1 K times that's also 1
and in fact that's the pattern that happens
from then on so here's a little lemma that
if L is bigger than 1 then 1 star L K equals 1
for any K natural number this is a very simple
looking formula but it is rather subtle because
there's actually two variables floating around
here there's the L which we're assuming is bigger
than 1 and of course a natural number and there's
also K so we're asserting something being true for
both L and K so what we're going to do is going
to prove this by induction it's one of our first
examples of induction it's a rather sophisticated
example actually so the idea is that we're going
to say prove this for all L in the range we're
interested in so we're going to prove it true
first for l equals 2 and we'll note that when
L is equal to 2 that we've already looked at that
case that 1 star 2 K is indeed equal to 1 for any
K and natural number so it's true for l equals 2
and now we're going to assume that it's true for a
sum L which is in the range that we're interested
in you know what it's bigger than 1 and the aim
is by the end of the argument we should have
proven it for L plus 1 so it requires us to go
from knowing that it's true for L to deducing that
is true for L plus 1 it's the basic inductive step
that mimics our construction of natural numbers
starting with 1 or in this case 2 and proceeding
one at a time to get wherever we want to go ok so
we're going to assume that this statement is true
for some particular L and now let's look at L
plus 1 so the first thing to do with L plus 1
is to look at the special case when K equals 1 1
star L plus 1 1 well of course that is equal to 1
now what about one star L plus 1 k plus 1 in order
to see what this is we use the definition of the
recursive or inductive aspect of star l plus 1
this is by definition 1 star L of acting on one
star L plus 1 K that's our definition of how we
go from star L 2 star L plus 1 ok so the claim
that 1 star L plus 1 K equals 1 for K in natural
numbers this is true by induction on K because
so let's say we're just interested in this claim
that 1 star L plus 1 K equals 1 for all K&N L is
now fixed so it's true for K equals 1 and if it's
true for K then this was going to be equal to 1
and then this is going to be equal to 1 and then
this is going to be equal to 1 so if it's true
for K then it's true for K plus 1 and so it's true
by induction on K all right so we've proven that 1
star L plus 1 K equals 1 for all K natural numbers
that's exactly what we wanted to do we wanted to
go from this statement to this statement and we've
done that and so we've satisfied the inductive
step for L and so the lemma is true by induction
on L all right there's a little bit sophisticated
so if it's a little bit complicated how we'll
think about it it is a rather sophisticated
notion of induction even though the actual result
is relatively simple but we will be talking about
induction some more it's a very important kind of
argument and at least this is an introduction to
it but we won't be talking about it on some other
occasion as well so this is just pinning down what
happens to powers or in fact multiples of 1 for
any of our star sub K operations all right so
let's build this successor limit hierarchy let's
begin we've started with this basic sequence of
operations the star 1 star 2 star 3 s which
ultimately came from addition my successor
and then we use this sequence to generate this
star infinity while we're calling star n now the
possibility arises that we can take this star n
which is after all just an operation on natural
numbers and we can take its successor because we
can take the successor of any operation so the
successor of star n is defined the following way
and I'm going to now use em and Ches instead of
M and ends because the N now is reserved for being
this index underneath this operation so previously
in our various formulas we had M star something
times n ok and now we're gonna replace that with M
star something times K okay so M star n prime the
successor of this one 1 is going to be M that's
always what we do and here is the inductive step
that defines M star and prime K plus 1 in terms
of M star and prime K as well as the previous
operation which is this star n so there's a
star in there ok and now we're going to introduce
some interesting notation for this successor of
star n we're going to give it another name we're
going to call it star n plus 1 all right so star
n plus 1 is by definition the successor of star
and star n was defined in terms of the limit of
these operations star n plus 1 is now defined as
the successor of star n so let's see if we can get
our head around this new operation star and plus
1 by just look at some simple examples so three
star n plus one one that's always three three
star n plus one - alright so we're just going to
systematically look at the definition this is by
definition three star n times three star n plus 1
1 so we lower this thing here by one there and we
lower this entry by one there now what is 3 star
n plus 1 1 well 3 star anything 1 is equal to 3
so this becomes 3 star n 3 and what is 3 star n
3 well star n is the limit of star 1 star 2 star 3
and when we multiply 3 times star n 3 what we have
to do is we have to replace this end with this
second entry which happens to be a 3 so we get
3 star 3 3 now star 3 is our third exponentiation
operator that's our triangle operation so this is
just 3 triangle 3 which we know is 3 to the 3 to
the 3 or 3 to the 27 so that's 3 star n + 1 - and
what about 3 star n plus 1 3 well that'll be 3
star n 1 less than this one followed by 3 star
n plus 1 to 1 less than this okay now this is
just what we calculated we've calculated that
this thing here is 3 to the 27 so this is all
together 3 star n times 3 to the 27 now the same
kind of thing happens as before this is a star
and that's a limit operation so when we multiply
this times this with respect to that we have to
replace the end with this second entry so we get
3 star 3 to the 27 times 3 to the 27 now this
is a huge thing because remember that when we
start considering these various stars going past
3 4 or 5 and so on we ended up with these towers
of Exponential's and we had sort of a string of
towers going this way and then a bunch of braces
of such strings going that way and then another
family of them going that way and then another
family of even bigger ones going down like and so
on so we keep on going this way and then this way
and then this way and this way sort of once for
each one of these index values so if we have 3 to
the 27 we're doing that operation many many times
so we get some huge array this is some enormous
lis huge number much much bigger than Zed prime
that we had a few videos ago ok and let's just
have a look at what the next one would be 3 star
n plus 1 4 so again my definition that's 3 star n
and then x 3 star and plus 1 3 that should be a 3
that 2 should be a 3 there we go and so what we're
getting here is what we've just calculated at the
previous step which is this 3 star 3 2 this 27 3
to the 27 and now we still have the star in here
so we have to replace the N here with this second
sort of exponent so here is 3 star 3 to the 27 3
to the 27 that whole thing is the subscript under
the star now and then we have to again multiply
that by the same thing here so it's a similar
kind of thing as we had here except that the huge
number that we obtained here is now the index for
our star here as well as being the exponent here
the second one so this is vastly bigger than this
one it's almost incomprehensible how big this
is but these are still early days this is still
relatively modest compared to the things we're
going to be seeing shortly great so now we can go
further we can extend our hierarchy we've had this
row already and now we can take the successor of
star n to get star n plus 1 and there's no reason
why we can now not take the successor of star n
plus 1 to get star and plus 2 let's say and the
successor of star n plus 2 is star n plus 3 and
so on so we get a new sequence of operations sort
of built from star n in the similar kind of way as
these original ones were built from plus and now a
new idea suggest itself that we can take the limit
of this new sequence so the sequence star n plus
1 star n plus 2 star n plus 3 also has a limit and
we're going to give that the name star 2n ok so
let's have a look at what that means in terms of a
limit the actual definition doesn't have any kind
of limits involved ok it's important to realize
that that we're not taking some infinite process
here we're not having to do something infinitely
like limit in analysis so it's not a limit like
an analysis but nevertheless we're still using
that word so confusion could possibly arise so
the definition here is very very concrete star
2n we're defining this operation very concretely
here's a natural number M here's a natural number
K and I'm telling you how to multiply m with
K with this operation star 2n okay and the
definition is now what you do is you take this K
and you replace 2 n with n plus K in other words
you go to the cave operation in this sequence
that defines this limit and you choose that case
1 so here's the first one here's the second one
here's a third one the caithe one is star n plus
K so we take that case operation that defined
our our limit and we apply that operation to
both m and K so we've defined star two and now in
terms of a previous operation but which previous
operation it is depends on K so for example if
we had to calculate ten star two and three then
that's by definition ten star n plus 3 times 3
and then we could try to simplify that because
this is a successor as a successor of n plus two
so we could write this as 10 star n plus 2 times
10 star n plus 3 and then subtract one here two
and we could then keep on going try to unravel
what this thing is it might take us quite a long
time to unravel what it is ok so now an exciting
prospect emerges that we started with our first
row to get our first limit star n these are all
operations and then we took successors of star and
we got a new sequence and we took its limit which
we call star 2n now of course there's nothing to
prevent us from taking successors of this one and
they are going to be called star 2n plus 1 that's
the first one and then the successor that will be
star 2n plus 2 and then start 2n plus 3 now we
have a new sequence of operations we can take
the limit of this sequence and we'll get star
in and we can keep going here right getting
the fourth row fifth row sixth row and so on
so we're getting all these new limits let's
actually circle them just to make it very clear
so these are kind of new kinds of operations that
are different in character essentially different
in character from these ones these ones are all
successors each one of these is like successor
something that had gone before these ones are
not successors their limits and notice that I
have put a little colon beside them that's some
kind of notation that we could use to alert us
to the fact that this thing here is actually a
limit not a successor okay and now you might
say well here's a lovely hierarchy all right
we've got this sort of potentially ongoing grid
we can just keep on adding more and more rows and
we can get bigger and bigger operations fabulous
that's good but in this story whenever you have
some kind of pattern that you're comfortable with
you can go beyond your comfort zone you can go to
a next level you may not want to but you can okay
and in this case going to the next level requires
a shift of thinking in fact it almost always
requires some kind of shift of thinking you
have to think in a little bit different way than
you have been up till that point so we're going
to think a little bit differently we're going
to say well we've created these new kinds of
operations they are limit operations rather than
successor operations okay so now we have a new
type of sequence namely these green ones here
they themselves form a sequence of operations
they themselves form a sequence of operations and
so we can take their limit we can take the limit
of these ones previously we've just been taking
limits of things along rows and now we're taking
the limits of those rows and regarding them as
a column and I'm going to take the limit of that
so here's star in start to end star 3 n these
can be used to generate a new operation called
star and squared star N squared and what is the
definition of star N squared well it's the same
kind of thing that we've seen before we always
define a limiting operation on a sequence in the
same way so once we have our sequence clearly in
mind then the definition of the limiting operation
is completely cut and dried so M star N squared K
going to multiply m and K with this operation so
what do we do well we regard this as being created
in some limiting fashion from this sequence and
what we do is we take the K element in this
sequence we look at the second exponent here
of the second operand and we take the K element in
the sequence this is the first element this is the
second element that's the third element so the K
element will be star K n and that's what we do to
M and K we multiply them with the operator star K
n that's already defined it's already in existence
we're using it to multiply m and K or maybe we
should say exponentiate m and K whatever okay so
this is quite interesting now it's a new kind of
limit it's at some point a kind of a higher limit
than these ones because it's a limit of limits
so for example we might now ask what is three
star and squared four all right this is a number
these are numbers and this is an operation like
exponentiation or triangle operation but somewhat
fancier somewhat more complicated the definition
here tells us that we need to interpret this by
thinking of replacing the N squared here with a
fourth operation which defines this as a limit so
it becomes 3 star 4 and 4 all right now it's a an
excellent exercise for you to pause the video
and go off for a few hours and a few hours is
probably what you'll need at least and try to see
if you can get your head around what's happening
with this number we want to evaluate this or
at least move towards evaluating it trying to
figure out what does this number actually look
like in some fashion or another so we want to
sort of strip away these various recursions and
sort of reveal the number itself although it'll
be very big so that's an excellent exercise to
do this so please please have a go and then you
can compare with what I'm going to show you an
either in a minute or two all right we'll see
if we get something comparable all right so
let's see if we agree on what we get here and
so I've done my best in trying to work this thing
out but I do admit that this kind of thing gives
me a headache after a little while and it's very
easy to get confused but nevertheless you'll get
the hang of it I hope and if I've made a mistake
then please correct me okay but the point is we
are still in the realm of somewhat realistic
arithmetic here at least in principle we can
unravel the things that we're talking about
these are very sophisticated operations is a
very serious kind of arithmetic but nevertheless
it does have a concrete aspect it's just that
the concreteness is blown out because of
the complexity you know the the complexity
just skyrockets and eventually it overwhelms us
and that's just the way it is but nevertheless
still at every stage there's something concrete at
least potentially concrete about what we're doing
okay so we're after a three star n squared for
a very modest looking arithmetic aproblem and
we've decided that that's three star for n
for now this thing here is also a limit okay
so we've already used the fact that N squared
is the limit of these ones in order to go from
here to here now for n is also a limit star
for n is the limit of star 3 n plus 1 star
3 and plus 2 star 3 and plus 3 and so on so when
we evaluate this because this is a limit we have
to basically sort of replace this thing with
a fourth term that defines it as a limit for
because this entry is for so we have to look
here and see which one's the fourth operation
and it is 3 + + 4 so this unravels 2 3 star 3
+ + 4 times 4 now this is a successor it's a
successor 3 n + 3 so the successor rule is that
this thing here will be 3 star 3 + + 3 and then
times the same operator 3 star 3 + + 4 but with
one less another 3 there all right now at the
next step we're gonna replace this thing here
with something so the 3 star 3 + + 4 becomes
3 star 3 n + 3 and then we get x 3 star 3 + + 4
the same one here x 2 1 less than that ok we're
just repeating this thing here we're repeating
this thing here what about this thing here so 3
star 3 + + 4 - okay that's going to be again by
the same recursive rule 3 star 3 n + 3 x 3 star
3 n + 4 x 1 but I'm not writing that down because
I know that's equal to 3 I know that whenever we
have something x 1 won't get to something that is
for all of the operations except for in fact the
original operation of multiplication star 1 but
for all the other ones it works alright so this
thing here reduces to 3 star 3 and +3 3 okay so
notice that we've gone from here to here I might
just record that it's useful to see that we've got
from here this 3 star 3 M + 4 3 has been sort of
expanded to this more elaborate expression
we have 3 star 3 n + 3 x 3 star 3 and +3 3
okay now we need to unravel this one this inside
thing here so this is just the same that's the
same and now what we do the same thing here we're
going to get 3 star 3 and plus 2 that one's going
to drop times 3 the same 1 through 3 star 3 and
plus 3 times 1 less there which is 2 then at the
next level this is all the same that's all the
same this thing here 3 star 3 and +3 through 2
it's the same kind of thing that we had up here
we're going to get 3 star 3 and plus 2 times 3
because what's really here is 3 times 3 star 3
n plus 3 1 which is just 3 so we might observe
here that let's see yeah the same kind of thing
that we had going from here to here is happening
from here to here so if we look at this thing here
that one there that's getting replaced two lines
down with this thing here ok so you can see the
same pattern going from here to here it's going
from this one to those ones ok what happens at
the next step well this is the same that's the
same that's the same and now we're going to do
the same thing that we just did in the previous
ones but I'm not going to go through all the
motions so you just take this thing here and
you get 3 star 3 n plus 1 times 3 star 3 n plus
2 2 and then you get 3 star 3 n plus 1 3 times
3 n plus 1 3 so we're going from here to here
in the same kind of fashion as we have in the
previous steps okay so we're unraveling this thing
and so far it's sort of under control things are
reasonable we're getting more and more stars of
stars of stars so the length of things are going
up but the actual numbers involved so far are all
manageable it's because we started with relatively
small numbers because that 4 was relatively small
ok so here's what we on the previous page we have
three star n squared four and then we got this
expression for it and now let's look at the last
term here three star three n plus one three so
this is a successor so successor three n so it's
three star three N and then we have to multiply
that by three star three n plus one of two and
we've seen that's the same as three star three
and three the same kind of two-step thing that
we've done before and now this says three star
three n and this thing here is a limit it's the
limit of this particular sequence so star 3n is a
limit of star 2 n plus 1 2 n plus 2 2 n plus 3 and
so on so when we want to evaluate this limiting
thing we have to replace this star 3 and with a
third operation that defines it in this limit
so we get 3 star 2n plus 3 3 because the third
one along here is star 2n plus 3 okay so now we
have to unravel this with the successor story so
this becomes 3 star 2 and plus 2 3 star 2 n plus
2 3 again we're using 2 steps there which is not
familiar I hope and then at the next level here we
can do exactly the same thing as we did from here
to here so we get 3 star 2n plus 1 times 3 star
2n plus 1 3 so things are becoming simpler in the
sense that these operations are slowly moving
down they're decreasing they're going down in
our in our ladder ok so what is this thing let's
have a look at three star 2 n plus 1 3 so the last
term in all of this so this is again a successor
so we can write it as 3 star 2n times 3 star 2 n
plus 1 2 which is the same as 3 star 2 and 3 and
so we get 3 star 2n at times three star n plus
three 3 because 2 n is the limit of n plus 1 n
plus 2 n plus 3 and were asked to take the third
element in that limit which is n plus 3 okay so
now let's take the last part of this sum 3 star
n + 3 3 just have a look at that I think they're
getting simpler now so we're moving towards having
something where the last thing that we have in our
bracket is actually something that we can write
down in some fashion or another okay so we've got
3 star n + 3 3 so that's a successor 3 star n + 2
x 3 star n + 2 3 the same kind of trick we've
seen before and then this thing here becomes 3
star n plus 1 3 star n plus 1 3 and now we have
this last row I'm gonna just peel this last one
off simpler than this one it's 3 star n + 1 3
so that's 3 star n x 3 star and 3 and now this 3
star n 3 is something that we can touch base with
because we know star n is just the limit of star 1
star 2 star 3 so 3 star n 3 is 3 star 3 3 this is
our familiar triangle operator so we finally kind
of gone down the ladder and found something that
we can recognize there is 3 star n 3 to the 3 to
the 3 there's 3 triangle 3 so 3 to the 3 to the
3 that's 3 to the 27 and here is 3 to the 27 ok
so what this is telling us is that we have because
this is a limit that we have to replace the N here
with 3 to the 27 so there it is there so it's 3
star seven six - five five nine seven four eight
four nine eight seven times three to the 27 which
is the same number so now we are at something
where we're touching base with the same kind of
pictures that we use when we were drawing Z prime
some videos ago but with Zed Prime we had to kind
of go across and then down then across and then
about five times or something like that okay now
we have to go across and down and across and down
somewhat more times okay we have to go across and
down and cross and down of this many times in each
time we have towers of threes and then at the very
end the last tower has this many a threes in it
so this is inconceivably bigger than Z prime
is just you know beyond anything that we can
imagine but this number which we finally kind
of gotten some kind of picture of now is just an
ingredient has to be then put back into wherever
it came from so it came from right here yeah so
this humongous number now has to be put into here
and so now when you have to unravel these things
here you don't have threes anymore like we've
had pretty well all the way up till now now you
have this humongous number there instead of the
three okay that makes everything dramatically
more complicated so you have these trillions
and trillions of steps to go down instead of
just three steps like we've sort of had up till
now so you have to evaluate put this thing into
there and then you have to evaluate this and then
you have to evaluate that and once you've got that
then you plug all of that back into here and then
you have to evaluate this on that and you take
that you plug that all back into here and then
you evaluate this on that and then this on that
and then this on that and that was all together
what you have to put in here and then you take
this and you evaluate this and then this on this
and then this on this and then this on this it's
pretty cool we have completely lost track except
in this sort of formal way of this thing it just
completely overwhelms us and this is only
three star n squared four you can probably
get an inkling that we are going to be going much
further okay we are going to be going much further
and this is of course sort of seemingly you know
in in Fantasyland but it's in fact only partially
in Fantasyland there's something very concrete
about this it's just that the concreteness is at
a level of arithmetic which happens to be beyond
us it's like we're like amoeba or something you
know trying to understand their rocketship it's
much much more complicated in that comparison
but I remind you that my fellow mathematician
colleagues seemingly have no problem with this
kind of thing because they go to infinity all the
time they let n go to infinity when you let n go
to infinity in these various modern constructions
you are necessarily zooming past numbers like this
you just zip by them on your road to infinity
I hope you're starting to see the weight and
the seriousness that these big numbers and the
arithmetic with these big numbers imposes on
us it's a huge burden to honestly address what's
going on here and it becomes I hope very glib to
make these pronouncements basically just by waving
one's hand and making some phrase like and now
let's let n go to infinity and now let's consider
the infinite sum and equals one to infinity blah
blah blah all right these are just really empty
statements from a computational point of view
when you realize that the natural numbers really
do have things like this this is a natural number
and the usual kind of scenario and it's there and
it's just one of many many which are even bigger
so next time we are going to carry on extending
this remarkable successor limit hierarchy and you
might think well this is all just a crazy game and
to a certain extent that's true but we will also
see later on that this successor limit hierarchy
has a life independent of its role here in this
SuperDuper arithmetic it can also be used in
much more modest and tangible ways in fact
eventually we're going to be looking at algebraic
calculus and we're going to be touching base with
something called non-standard analysis which
is a kind of way of using infinitesimally to
do calculus and purely algebraic way and when we
do eventually get to that point we'll see that
exactly this successor limit hierarchy plays
a very natural and useful and important role
so it's quite remarkable so it's well worth you
having some thinking about this this hierarchy
and next time we're going to investigate it even
further I'm going to reveal more of its beauty
and remarkable aspect I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening